---
layout: post
title: "Will Rogers and Will Rogers and The House That Jokes Built"
date: 2013-09-01
categories: ["arts and culture"]
author: "Madeleine H., Anonymous"
lat: 34.0549447
lng: -118.51254519999998
collectiontitle: "[Name of the archival collection], UCLA Library Special Collections"
quarter: Fall 2013
desc: "Hollywood fell in love with cowboy who moved out west. Many found it unique that he did not abandon his roots, but instead he incorporated them into his new life. As a humorist, actor, political satirist, newspaper columnist, author, radio broadcaster, and more, Will Rogers remains a beloved figure in America. He impacted a wide range of audiences during and long after his lifetime, profoundly shaping the public’s opinion. “The House That Jokes Built” reflects Rogers’ cowboy lifestyle inside and out, and for years the public has enjoyed the luxury of seeing a more personal side of Rogers inside his home. Everyone loved the cowboy, and the cowboy loved everyone: as Rogers recalls, “I never met a man I didn’t like.”"
---
During the 1930s, the Great Depression brought about a period of turmoil and panic in America. While America was recovering, Oklahoma native Will Rogers moved to Beverly Hills and brought life back to the once-bustling city of Los Angeles. With his southern cowboy charm, Will Rogers changed the lives of audiences throughout various mediums, including television, newspapers and books, radio broadcasts, and more.

Rogers was born in Cherokee Indian Territory in Oklahoma, and his father held a prominent leadership role in Cherokee society. He always wanted his son to be business-oriented and responsible; however, Rogers’ easygoing, boyish spirit often led him to trouble.  After tenth grade, Rogers dropped out of school to become a cowboy, directing his focus towards horses and roping.  He later left home in 1901 to become a gaucho in Argentina.  After losing all of his money, Rogers left for South Africa to join Texas Jack’s Wild West Circus.  He quit Texas Jack’s to take part in a new circus in Australia before eventually heading back to the United States to become a vaudeville performer. Though Rogers frequently traveled from city to city, he never abandoned his ranch-life roots.

Throughout Will Rogers’ life, the western cowboy transformed into a Hollywood star. Audiences fell in love with Rogers’ charisma because he offered humor and warmth at a time when all seemed hopeless. Rogers published a daily newspaper column in the Saturday Evening Post, in which he displayed his nostalgia for a happier, simpler past of an American farmer. Rogers produced his first twenty-two minute long silent film The Ropin’ Fool and appeared in many silent films; however, his audiences fell in love with him for his performances in “talkies.” This transition was very smooth for Rogers, and oddly, he never memorized his lines. Instead, he would read through the script and simply improvise, resulting in genuine performances. It was this sincerity that Hollywood and moviegoers fell in love with. Even movies released prior to his death, such as Steamboat ‘Round the Bend’, brought in great revenue. In Rogers’ radio broadcasts, he primarily focused on voicing his political opinion, often satirizing politicians and Congress. He befriended many politicians and strongly influenced the public’s opinion by building support for Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal Plan.

Will Rogers died in a plane crash at age 55; his wife died soon after.  The family donated their property to the state of California. Will Rogers’ State Park consists of 187 acres located in the Pacific Palisades. The park offers tours of their ranch home, equestrian activities such as horseback riding lessons, guided trail rides, polo matches, and hiking paths (Will Rogers SHP). The ranch itself includes a 31-room house, surrounded by a stable, corrals, riding ring, roping arena, golf course, and polo fields (Horngren). More important than the stables, and arguably the most prominent part of the park is the actual house on the property.

The house itself reflects the values and lifestyle of Will Rogers and his life in Oklahoma. In a letter to the architect, Rogers instructed that the house be built at ground level so that he could ride his horses right up to the house and hitch them at the porch (California’s Western Ranch House).  He wanted the house to be connected to the landscape in every way possible. For example, “through his window, before the trees grew so large, Will Rogers could observe his horses grazing while he worked on his newspaper articles” (ibid). Rogers also built a “sneak staircase” so that he could go to and from the stables without going through the house (Historic Stable at Will Rogers SHP). The interior of the home is decorated with Native American rugs and collections of various animal portraits, and the open fields on the property reflect his passion for horses. By displaying Rogers’ upbringing in Oklahoma as a cowboy through the architecture of his Beverly Hills home, the ranch stands out from most other homes.

Hollywood fell in love with cowboy who moved out west. Many found it unique that he did not abandon his roots, but instead he incorporated them into his new life. As a humorist, actor, political satirist, newspaper columnist, author, radio broadcaster, and more, Will Rogers remains a beloved figure in America. He impacted a wide range of audiences during and long after his lifetime, profoundly shaping the public’s opinion. “The House That Jokes Built” reflects Rogers’ cowboy lifestyle inside and out, and for years the public has enjoyed the luxury of seeing a more personal side of Rogers inside his home. Everyone loved the cowboy, and the cowboy loved everyone: as Rogers recalls, “I never met a man I didn’t like.”


#### Works cited

1. California State Parks. Will Rogers State Historic Park Equestrian and Livestock Management Plan.
2. &quot;California's Western Ranch House.&quot; California's Western Ranch House.  19 Nov. 2013.
3. &quot;Historic Stable at Will Rogers SHP.&quot; Historic Stable at Will Rogers SHP. Web. 19 Nov. 2013.
4. Horngren, Barbara. &quot;California State Parks Offer Rocky Cliffs, Towering Trees – And Inspiration.&quot; Lesbian News 36.6 (2011): 32  14 Nov. 2013.
5. Gehring, Wes D. &quot;Hollywood's Dilemma About POSTHUMOUS RELEASES.&quot; USA Today Magazine 131.2696 (2003): 64. 19 Nov. 2013.
6. Sterngold, James. &quot;Feud Over Private Horses in Public California Park.&quot; New York Times 24 Dec. 2001: A12. 14 Nov. 2013.
7. Van Horne, Harriet. &quot;Will Rogers: America`s Favorite Cowboy.&quot; California State Parks. California Department of Parks and Recreation, 19 Nov. 2013.
8. &quot;Will Rogers SHP.&quot; California Department of Parks and Recreation. 14 Nov. 2013.
