---
layout: post
title: "The Santa Monica Pier"
date: 2014-01-01
categories: "history"
author: "Zixuan Fan, Etienne Leroux, Anonymous"
lat: 34.0092419
lng: -118.49760370000001
collectiontitle: "Irene Wolt papers (Collection 1871), UCLA Library Special Collections"
quarter: Winter 2014
desc: "This artifact is a booklet depicting a plan set forth by an unofficial organization to restore the Santa Monica Pier.  The pages of this booklet describe each alteration to the pier accompanied by an artistic drawing.  The context of the pier’s need for renewal dates back to its poor construction in the early 1900s as well as its original purpose.  The Santa Monica community sought to create a recreational area of which reflects the cultural diversity of the Los Angeles community."
---
This artifact is a booklet depicting a plan set forth by an unofficial organization to restore the Santa Monica Pier.  The pages of this booklet describe each alteration to the pier accompanied by an artistic drawing.  The context of the pier’s need for renewal dates back to its poor construction in the early 1900s as well as its original purpose.  The Santa Monica community sought to create a recreational area of which reflects the cultural diversity of the Los Angeles community.

The Santa Monica Pier has not always been the popular tourist attraction that it is today. Originally it was built as a way to guide sewage pipes into the ocean. While the pier had its functional use, it soon began to attract people with the convenient fishing opportunity it provided.  The pier quickly became a popular attraction for tourist and locals.  In June of 1916, a carousel was built to add to the activities on the pier.  The carousel, named the Looff Hippodrome, instantly proved to be a hit within the community.  Shortly after its construction, Looff expanded the carousel as well as added various other activities, such as a bowling alley, a roller coaster, restaurants, and other outdoor attractions (SantaMonicaPier.org). In later years, it became necessary to renovate the pier in order to maintain its social popularity.

Through multiple restorations, the Santa Monica Pier has become an iconic landmark in the Southern California area. The restoration plan depicted by our artifact was proposed in 1973 in response to its poor condition. In the early 1970’s, a structural report found that the pillars underneath the pier had started to decay.  The supports for the pier were constructed out of concrete and steel.  When seawater seeped into the pillars and rusted the inner steel supports, the pillars burst due to the increased pressure. The structural report also found wood burrowing worms within the pier.  At first, the city wanted to completely demolish the pier and replace it with an island resort, but with petitions and resistance from the public, the pier was kept. It was agreed upon that the pier would undergo a restoration that would preserve its cultural significance (Lucas). 

The restoration of the Santa Monica Pier was a very strenuous but rewarding project. Hundreds of people were involved in the restoration such as artists, architects, environmentalists, lawyers and many others. Our artifact depicts a precise design guideline that was established for this particular restoration to promote a homogenous and diverse architecture for the pier. The pages in the booklet meticulously describe the proposed changes to many parts of the pier, ranging from the color of the buildings to the texture of the walls. The Carousel Pavilion was the first structure to be built on the pier, and hence got a lot of attention during its restoration.  The main goal was to refurbish the many details that once existed on the Pavilion, such as the sixteen golden onion-shaped domes. Across from the Pavilion is another building, the second oldest, whose restoration was directed towards making it a museum. Its antique and unique style made it an ideal location for a museum, in which the history of the Santa Monica Pier could be displaced. Many other aspects of the pier were analyzed, such as the vehicular circulation and parking, the views and the corridors, the proportion of the buildings, the roof features, and the ornaments and decorations. Even the sidewalks would be renovated to include benches, kiosks and shaded areas. All of these features as well as many others were redesigned to revitalize public interest in the pier while remaining faithful to its historical context. The project for the restoration of the pier was given $45 million and was organized in multiple phases (Crump).

One of the main visions of the restoration was to make the pier a greater cultural attraction. This pushed many buildings to be modified for different purposes. The art gallery and theatre were to be kept and remodeled; this would encourage events such as Parties, dinners, weddings, and bar mitzvahs. An arts and crafts courtyard was also planned for artists to paint and display their work. Areas were to be allocated such that street vendors with pushcarts could roam all over the pier with unique, handmade items to attract tourists (Wolt).

In order to become a greater cultural attraction, the restoration sought to expand its appeal to the diverse culture.  The restoration’s goal was for people of all ages, genders, and race to feel welcomed at the pier. This is why it planned to have diverse activities such as children’s rides, games, a flea market, community events, first class and family restaurants, as well as fast-food restaurants (Wolt).

Today, the pier has become a cultural hotspot for the Santa Monica community.  During the summer, the pier comes alive with miscellaneous outdoor activities, featuring free concerts and movies as well as various fitness activities. After its restoration, people visit the pier for its diverse recreational options, including bike rentals, fishing gear, souvenir shops, live music and even an aquarium. The pier’s cultural significance has been further developed by being used in several major productions and television shows, such as Forrest Gump, Iron Man and South Park. As a historic attraction, Santa Monica Pier has permanently placed the hand-painted horses of the 1922 merry-go-round near the pier entrance, which provoke the nostalgic memories of the pier over the generations. The Santa Monica Pier has become one of the most prominent images of the city of Los Angeles, as well as a dynamic, grassroot, culture inspiration for its artists.


**Bibliography**

Irene Wolt Papers 1941-2009 Box 50. (Collection 1871). Library Special Collections, Charles E. Young Research Library, University of California, Los Angeles.

 A Symbol of Resiliency SANTA MONICA PIER.&quot; Los Angeles Times 23 Sept. 1983

&quot;Santa Monica Pier.&quot; Santa Monica Pier Org. Retrieved from http://santamonicapier.org

“Santa Monica Pier Design Guidelines” / [prepared by Thirtieth Street Architects, Inc., Rolland Crump, Designer, Pier Restoration Corporation Staff]. Santa Monica; The Corp., 1987.



