---
layout: post
title: "Captain Don Portola"
date: 2014-04-01
categories: ["arts and culture"]
author: "Anonymous"
lat: 32.8328112
lng: -117.2712717
collectiontitle: "[Name of the archival collection], UCLA Library Special Collections"
quarter: Spring 2014
desc: "The artifact that we chose to analyze is a diary that details the expedition of Captain Don Portola, the first Spanish explorer to explore Northern California by land; it is a translation of the original, written by Portola himself. We decided to focus our discussion on not only the expedition, but also the history encompassing the entire voyage including the motives for the voyage, the journey itself, the reactions of the explorers, and the long-term effects the expedition had on New Spain."
---
The artifact that we chose to analyze is a diary that details the expedition of Captain Don Portola, the first Spanish explorer to explore Northern California by land; it is a translation of the original, written by Portola himself. We decided to focus our discussion on not only the expedition, but also the history encompassing the entire voyage including the motives for the voyage, the journey itself, the reactions of the explorers, and the long-term effects the expedition had on New Spain.

There were two motives behind the Portolà expedition. In 1542, the explorer Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo sailed north from Mexico along the Pacific Coast of North America to establish the Spanish Empire’s claim to Baja California. Over the next two centuries, the Spanish presence remained in California in the form of a handful of Jesuit missions, but little had been done to protect and expand these small settlements. The Jesuit missions were the first concern of the Portolà expedition. Carlos III of Spain expelled the Jesuit order in 1767 and Don Gaspar de Portolà, who was the acting governor of California, was placed in charge of an excursion to replace the Jesuits with Franciscan missions, which were to be the roots of the Spanish Empire’s new influence along the coast. The King of Spain had another purpose for governor Portolà’s exploration party. With the Russians encroaching southwards from Alaska and the British exploration in Canada heading further west, the pacific coastline was a lucrative trade zone with the threat of invasion on two sides. Portolà’s orders were to travel by land to Monterey and eventually as north as the San Francisco Bay in order to expel any Russians and solidify what was to become El Camino Real.

The expedition began at Santa Maria, making its way towards San Diego to meet up with the rest of the party before continuing north in hopes of reaching Monterey Bay. The party from Santa Maria consisted of Don Gaspar de Portola, Father Junipero Serra, Father Miguel Campa, and four soldiers. Along the way, Father Campa was installed in Velicata as head of the mission there. Five days into their march, they were joined by Sergeant Ortega and his company, increasing their numbers by ten soldiers. After two weeks of rest at San Diego the expedition continued now numbering 64 men in total, comprised of soldiers, muleteers, Christianized Indians, and Fathers Juan Crespi and Francisco Gomez. When the party reached Monterey Bay, they did not recognize it for what it was; it was amusingly written in Portola’s diary, while they were camped next to the bay, that “we all agreed that undoubtedly, we would find the Port of Monterey” (Portolá 65). Six days later, they continued onwards in search of Monterey Bay. This failure to recognize Monterey Bay for what is was necessitated a second expedition to the area before a mission could be established. A month later, the expedition reached San Francisco Bay and marked the first recorded European sighting of the region. After three days, the expedition decided that they should head back to San Diego, having failed to locate the Port of Monterey. The Indians encountered along the way were mostly friendly, frequently bearing gifts and their generosity was reciprocated by the members of the expedition party; however, there were a number of noteworthy incidents during the expedition. In one instance, a native Indian was encouraged by his peers to share any relevant information: he told the party, through signs, that his chief and other villages were uniting to ambush the party and kill Father Serra and his company. This culminated in a confrontation that was settled by gunshots, scaring the Indians away. Conversely, there were natives who were, “so intensely sordid that they importuned us to receive their women whom they offered so that they might be given articles of clothing” (Portolá 49). Another time, the Fathers were granted permission to baptize two dying children. This truly shows that each group of Indians was a distinctly individual community, each with varying reactions to the Spanish explorers.

Unlike his predecessors, who mainly explored the California by sea, Portola chose to march through the inner land, which offered the expedition more opportunities to interact with native Indians. They met the first group of Indians near the Port of San Diego after a long and painful voyage. The Indians, armed with bows and arrows, were vigilant towards the Spanish explorers. As Costanso describes in his narrative, &quot;These Indians stopped every little while upon some height, watching our men, and showing the fear which the strangers caused them by the very thing they did to hide it&quot;(Costanso 85). But it was nonetheless easy to convince them that the Spaniards meant no harm. The explorers followed the natives to rancheria, which consisted of almost forty families. Costanso describes the Indians as: &quot;haughty temper, daring, covetous, great jesters, and braggarts, although of little valor; they make great boast of their powers, and hold the most respect for the most valiant&quot; (Costanso 86). North of San Diego lived a multitude of Indians, nearly all of whom were good-natured. The Indians inhabiting the Islands and the Coast of the Santa Barbara Channel were especially vivacious and industrious. Their lifestyles were different from the former group. Although they &quot;don't know the use of earthenware as those of San Diego use it&quot; (Costanso 91), they were actually much better in other aspects. They had their own funeral ceremonies, a unique method of making bread, immense dexterity, and also their own language system. Costanso even believed there was a certain connection between their language and that of the Mexicans. The further north the Spaniards marched, the more sparsely populated the lands were, but these Indians too were equally affable and peaceable. In short, the members of Portola exploration had many interactions with the natives. These amicable people left upon the explorers the impression that they could easily be controlled, which further motivated the Spaniards to convert these natives to Christianity and make them subjects to Spain.

The Portola expedition had many long-term effects: consolidation of Spanish sovereignty over all of California; increased spread of Christianity throughout the native Americans; and a financial goldmine for the colonialists. The Portola expedition resulted in the establishment of a presidio and Mission in Monterey. The goal behind colonizing Alta California was to prevent other Europeans such as the English from “establishing a permanent settlement there as Russian trappers had already done further south”(Guerrero Xiii). Spain wanted to have complete control over California and was unwilling to contest other nations for its territory. The Portola expedition successfully placed a presidio and naval base in Monterey, which prevented European encroachment on the land for over 30 years. Another benefit the Portola expedition lended to the Spain was the bolstered spread of Christianity. The establishment of a Mission in Monterey catalyzed the formation of three other Missions including San Francisco, Santa Cruz, and San Bonaventura. Leading the charge of Christianity was Father of the Mission system and companion of Portola, Junipero Serra, who thanks to Portola’s prosperous expedition, managed to arrive in Alta California  and begin establishing the infrastructure for the Mission system in Northern California. One of Spain’s highly objectives in colonizing the New World was to facilitate the spread of Christianity in order to make the Natives “subjects of the crown; these gentiles [were to] become people of reason”(Guerrero XVi). Fortunately for the Spanish, creating more Missions in Northern California put them one step closer towards achieving this goal. The last benefit the Portola expedition bestowed upon New Spain was the boost to its economy that preceded upon the founding of Missions in Alta California. Northern California was enormously unique in that it was plentiful in water and fertile soil. This region of California has always been a fruitful area for agriculture. Since the Native Americans in Northern California were much more enthusiastic and friendly towards the Spanish, they served to be ideal sources of labor. The combination of additional labor resources as well as natural resources led to a population burst and economic boom in California. This can be specifically tied to the Portola expedition because it led to the founding and eventual colonization of Northern California.

The Portola expedition built upon preceding explorers, such as Cabrillo and Vizcaino, and inspired Anza. Together, these explorers built a foundation upon which the Spanish empire established their foothold in California. Their combined legacy stands to this day, with many places still carrying the names given to them by these explorers, such as Los Angeles and San Francisco. Without their contributions, the fate of the Los Angeles region, and indeed the entirety of California, might have been quite different.


#### Works cited

1. Constanso, Don Miguel. The Narrative of the Portola Expedition. Trans. Ray Brandes. Newhall: Hogarth Press, 1970. Print.
2. Costansó, Miguel. The discovery of San Francisco Bay : the Portolá expedition of 1769-1770 : the diary of Miguel Costansó, in Spanish and English. Ed. Peter Browning. Lafayette, CA: Great West Books, 1992. Print.
3. Guerrero, Vladimir. The Anza Trail and the Settling of California . Santa Clara: California Legacy Book, 2006. Print.
4. Portolá, Gaspar de. Diary of Gaspar de Portolá during the California expedition of 1769-1770. Eds. Donald Eugene Smith, and Frederick J. Teggart. Berkeley: University of California, 1909. Print
