---
layout: post
title: "Works Progress Administration: A Snap of History"
date: 2014-04-01
categories: ["politics", "society"]
author: "Anonymous"
lat: 34.03445749999999
lng: -118.24945309999998
collectiontitle: "[Name of the archival collection], UCLA Library Special Collections"
quarter: Spring 2014
desc: "Through the power of imagery, the photos illustrated on the Los Angeles Daily News help tell the effectiveness and the importance of the Works Progress Administration as it attempted to stimulate the broken economy through federal work relief programs. Women and children, in particular, were strong beneficiaries of the program as they were provided opportunities to improve their situation through work and services like the Toy Loan libraries. Unfortunately, some programs would fall short of their goal as a result of an influx of immigrants, leaving Los Angeles scrambling to respond. All in all, the photos for the Los Angeles Daily News provide a story without words that illustrate America’s effort to rebuild a broken economy and society."
---
A captured moment brings forth the literal representation of the history of the Work Progress Administration (W.P.A.) in Los Angeles (LA). Between the years of 1935-1943, the Work Progress Administration, proposed by President Roosevelt, worked to improve the US economy by employing millions of Americans and improving infrastructure nationwide. Not only did the bill address post-World War I catastrophes, but also the devastating effects of the Great Depression. In an effort to inform the public, the Los Angeles Daily News publicized photos and articles based on these projects in Los Angeles. Through analyzing various photos of the projects from the LA Daily News, the W.P.A. had an evident effect on the city. Specifically, the W.P.A. helped improve the economy through financially stabilizing the lives of women and children by offering jobs and services. Yet, the bill also seemed to allocate more resources to certain areas and left cities, like Los Angeles, in a state of despair.

Through its continual progress, women directly benefited from W.P.A.’s efforts because prior to this time, women were deemed inferior to work at all. First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt felt it necessary to advocate for the employment of women. The W.P.A.’s women’s division was soon created in 1935 under the leadership of Ellen S. Woodward. Instead of remaining housewives, women slowly became more established in the job market through “housekeeping, sewing, and professional projects, which encompassed library, educational, and recreational work” (Marcketti). During that time, sewing-room projects became the most prominent W.P.A. women’s division project nationwide, employing half of the working women.

In one of LA Daily News’s photographs, three Caucasian women are shown spinning materials on spinning wheels. If one analyzes the photo closely, one can perhaps distinguish the varying ages of these three women. With that said, Woodward advocated all spectrums of life by employing women between ages 18 to 65 (Marcketti). Sewing-rooms also ran year-round and varied from a few seamstresses in a room (as illustrated in the photograph) to a whole factory line in a warehouse. Through the collective work of these sewing rooms, women created over 300 million different pieces of clothing for less fortunate individuals within homes, local sanitariums, and prisons (Marcketti), providing affected areas of the recession, including Los Angeles, with necessities to get back on their feet.

Consequently, the sewing-room project also gained immense support by its local communities because of its flexibility in women employment. Depending on the particular city’s need for clothing at the time, sewing rooms allowed for an equal opportunity for skilled and unskilled women alike. Different tasks within the rooms was made available, ranging from the simple works of pressing cloth to the intricacy of designing patterns. If an immigrant woman was employed, the project provided basic education services to improve her literacy skills and accountability for her future (“Living New Deal”). As a direct result of the project’s effectiveness, majority of women were able to find better paying jobs as World War II commenced years later, as well as prove that women were capable of holding their own weight in society (“Living New Deal”). Today, women working is a normal occurrence.

In addition to the W.P.A’s efforts to boost the economy, children of the United States were not forgotten. President Franklin D. Roosevelt made it clear that children would not undergo a toy-less childhood during one of America’s darkest financial downturn. As a result, the Works Progress Administration included the Toy Loan Project. The project benefited the children and the economy by, “provid[ing] employment opportunities by collecting and repairing toys for children and operating toy lending ‘libraries’”(Giles). Paralleling the structure of traditional libraries, children of all incomes were able to register and use a card to check out toy. Parents would pay 10 cents a week to access this resource, allowing their child to borrow the toy for up to a whole week, with the possibility of renewing it for another week (Dimmick). Toy libraries offered a variety of toys in different shapes and sizes to appeal to the different demands of children for example, “dolls, cars, push-trains, doll buggies, pedal cars, and planes” were some of the selections children could make (Giles).

In regards to Los Angeles, the photo illustrated in the LA Daily News of a toy library located on 963 Towne Ave, Los Angeles, brings a physical insight into the importance of the toy loan libraries in Los Angeles. The subject of the photograph is the large gathering of children, who eagerly wait in line for their opportunity to borrow a toy as they are guided by toy librarians. The photograph magnifies the importance of these libraries, which is to aid the children from families who were hit the hardest from the financial crisis to families who had no organized way of obtaining toys. Thus, the children of Los Angeles would not go without the precious childhood experience of playing with toys. Whether their families were in severe poverty or not, the W.P.A’s inexpensive and efficient toy loan program would bring smiles to Los Angeles children while still benefiting the economy as a whole by creating jobs for adults. Nonetheless, the efforts of the Toy Loan Libraries were greatly beneficial to the low economic status of many families in Los Angeles and the economy in a time of great need.

Since the W.P.A. worked to stimulate the economy by providing jobs, this ultimately led to a large influx of immigrants. The photo depicts the renovation of Lankershim Blvd in Los Angeles and a Caucasian woman fixing a poster that states this project is led by the W.P.A. In this picture, it is clear that it is the beginning of the W.P.A. since a large amount of minorities did not yet inhabit LA. Los Angeles became the home to many immigrants in search of jobs, but it also became a home of poverty since immigrants had to work undesirable jobs with a lower income than American citizens. Moreover, minorities moved to Downtown Los Angeles, since it was near more affluent areas such as Beverly Hills that offered jobs to minorities.

Like many other areas in LA, the roads and streets of Lankershim Blvd were defined as “endangered.” Lankershim was classified as endangered because early work programs led to class conflict between early immigrant workers and those already living in LA. Consequently, LA was classified as a violent and undesirable place to reside since, the city was not able to keep up with the large increase in population. For this reason, Lankershim Blvd and other streets in LA were omitted and left unattended by California.

In addition, the large increase in population led to programs focusing on improving essential needs such as fixing schools. Yet, the W.P.A. did not build new schools in LA, but rather only remodeled schools. Today, schools in LA are overcrowded, offer lower education, and disable minorities from obtaining a higher education. Although the W.P.A. was trying to keep up with the increasing population of LA, it allocated more resources on benefiting the wealthy who did not have a large population of racial minorities. For example, in Beverly Hills, the W.P.A. focused on building more amenities such as tennis courts. Consequently, the discrepancies of the allocation of resources reflects the diverse state of  present day LA, which is underdeveloped and full of individuals with lower socioeconomic statuses.

Through the power of imagery, the photos illustrated on the Los Angeles Daily News help tell the effectiveness and the importance of the Works Progress Administration as it attempted to stimulate the broken economy through federal work relief programs. Women and children, in particular, were strong beneficiaries of the program as they were provided opportunities to improve their situation through work and services like the Toy Loan libraries. Unfortunately, some programs would fall short of their goal as a result of an influx of immigrants, leaving Los Angeles scrambling to respond. All in all, the photos for the Los Angeles Daily News provide a story without words that illustrate America’s effort to rebuild a broken economy and society.


