---
layout: post
title: "The Science of Oriental Medicine"
date: 2014-01-01
categories: ["environment and science"]
author: "Celeste M., Daniel A."
lat: 34.043669
lng: -118.258289
collectiontitle: "UCLA Library Special Collections"
quarter: Winter 2014
desc: "In Foo and Wing Herb Company’s book, The Science of Oriental Medicine, readers will find articles on health and the care of the body derived from principles underlying the oriental system of medicine, as practiced in China."
---
The subject of health is always interesting and is uppermost in the thoughts of many people. Within the pages of The Foo and Wing Herb Company’s book entitled The Science of Oriental Medicine, the reader will find several thought-provoking articles. These articles are suggestions for health and the care of the body derived from principles underlying the oriental system of medicine, as practiced in China. The old adage that &quot;an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure” fittingly illustrates Dr. Li Wing’s philosophy of the preservation of mental and bodily vigor throughout the novel.

In Chapter VII, Dr. Li Wing describes the power of herbal medicines, how the power is obtained, and what its effects are on the human system. He also mentions that vivisection, dissecting the living human body, is the foundation of the oriental system of medicine. For more than two thousand years, The Foo and Wing Herb Company has searched out and condensed more than four hundred kinds of medicines deemed “essential and best for the white man&quot; (79) in times of ill health.

Dr. Li Wing believed that everything in the world was made up of five elements, namely: water, mineral, vegetation, fire and earth. Similarly to the world, the vital organs and everything in nature corresponds to these five kinds of the elements. This theory is of very great importance, and one that Dr. Li Wing is anxious to explain throughout Chapter VII. According to Dr. Li Wing, some remedies can assist only one organ, while others can assist more than one. If a remedy or prescription is very skillfully prepared (sometimes with ten or twenty different medicines), it will bring force to all of the vital organs and to the whole body. On the other hand, certain combinations, or remedies, can be poorly arranged, which causes each herb to lose its natural effect and produces no power over the human body. With some kinds of remedies the power goes through the upper part of the body; in some it goes through the lower; in some through the outside of the body or the skin; and sometimes the effect is retained in the vital organs. When there is sickness in two or more of the vital organs than there is the need of multiple remedies. Each of the vital organs; therefore, when it is afflicted with ill health, has its own remedy.

The first holy men in China, who were wonderful physicians, used capital punishment to try their herbal medicines; and the second holy men used it for the study of anatomy. The name of the first holy man was Son Non. He commenced his work by finding out the specific plants that were useful for the people as food. Afterwards he studied all forms of vegetation and the thought that he ought to commence treating diseases. He relied upon the belief that the world included five kinds of elements. All of his herbal medicines were chosen and classified according to their relations to these five natural elements. Everyday, Son Non tested herbal medicines to teach students who were learning from him. Some days he tried poisonous herbs, and three times he appeared to be dead from the use of these, but the students used a certain liquid preparing that he had ready and saved his life three times. His book Poon Chow Kien is referenced because many of Son Non’s opinions in his first book are vital to Dr. Li Wing’s philosophy.

During one occasion, Son Non’s tongue and throat swelled so large that he nearly died. Even with medicines, he was very weak and for a few days was unable to do any work. In desperation, his students went to tell the emperor. The emperor called together all his ministers and tried to generate a better method of testing the herbs. Some other ministers said that it would be a good plan to use the criminals condemned to capital punishment, and try the poisonous medicines with them. They sent for Son Non and laid the plan before him. This is when vivisection among the Chinese traditions came to fruition.

Wong Ti, born as Hin Yuen, was known as China's second holy man. Similar to Son Non, Wong Ti also performed experiments on criminals charged with capital punishment. But unlike Son Non, Wong Ti primarily focused on the human anatomy rather than herbal remedies. This piece of information allows readers to easily differentiate between the first and second holy men of China. Wong Ti, as China's emperor, conducted his study of the human anatomy through vivisection. Dr. Li Wing’s article provides the audience with a closer look at how Wong Ti performed his experiments. Wong Ti commonly had his human subjects sedated with chloroform or ether before performing the vivisection. This seems to suggest that his test subjects were not as willing as Son Non's subjects, likely because of the extreme pain that comes with vivisection. After cutting open his subject, he would observe the organs and their functions. Through vivisection, Wong Ti discovered twelve vital organs of the human body and how they functioned. This proved to be a big feat for Wong Ti in his research. But it also raised the question of ethics and morality among the late 1800s society.

Morality is often thought to be fluid and dynamic in nature. Nearly any situation can be justified to serve a particular purpose. Dr. Li Wing shines light on the differing attitudes of human experimentation between ancient China and modern-day America. He makes a note that human experimentation is considered a taboo subject among Americans. This shows that the artifact not only provides tangible information but also gives the reader insight on the moral implications behind human experimentation in ancient China. Four thousand years ago, human experimentation was commonly accepted throughout China because of the results achieved through vivisection. Advocates of human experimentation like Dr. Li Wing, argue that people should see human experimentation as a punishment for criminals who were sentenced to death, as well as an opportunity to gain knowledge of the human anatomy. Critics would protest that criminals were cured from sickness only to be killed and dissected. In addition, healthy people were sometimes given herbs that unintentionally worsened their health.

Emperor Wong Ti and Dr. Li Wing promoted the use of herbal medicines and human experimentation as opportunities to further scientific research. Some may view these acts to be cruel and unusual, while others see it as a learning experience; the latter exemplifies the rule of Emperor Wong Ti, where the end justifies the means.
