---
layout: post
title: "California's Climate"
date: 2014-04-01
categories: ["environment and science"]
author: "Anonymous"
lat: 34.0548198
lng: -118.2396407
collectiontitle: "[Name of the archival collection], UCLA Library Special Collections"
quarter: Spring 2014
desc: "Semi-tropical California: its climate, healthfulness, productiveness, and scenery is currently located under the Special Collection Box at the Young Research Library at UCLA. It was written by Benjamin Cummings Truman and published in 1874 at the San Francisco A. L. Bancroft and Company. The item looks like a typical book worn down over time, but is still legible."
---
Semi-tropical California: its climate, healthfulness, productiveness, and scenery is currently located under the Special Collection Box at the Young Research Library at UCLA. It was written by Benjamin Cummings Truman and published in 1874 at the San Francisco A. L. Bancroft and Company. The item looks like a typical book worn down over time, but is still legible.

Benjamin Cummings Truman, a Civil War Union officer, came to California in 1866 from Providence, Rhode Island as a special agent of the Post Office (Semi-tropical California...). Sometime during the 1870s he became an editor of the Los Angeles Evening Express, and the owner of the Los Angeles Star. In 1874, during his time at the Los Angeles Star he wrote this book (Semi-tropical California...). The book incorporates details on the state of California and its unique climate. It has a strong focus on the Los Angeles area, though the “semi-tropical” in the title would also include Monterey, San Diego, and various other counties (Semi-tropical California...). In his book Truman also goes on to discuss the cities of San Bernardino, Anaheim, and Wilmington. Certain key topics the book addresses contain: ranches, agriculture, mines, fruit orchards, and other types of resources both man-made and naturally abundant (Semi-tropical California...).

The main focus of the book is its position on the climate of California and all of its benefits. For example, in chapter four, “The Climate and Healthfulness of Los Angeles”, the book commences with a comment on how California’s weather has a healthful and stupendous climate: “The climate of Los Angeles is genial, and noted for its healthfulness” (Truman 31). The book also gives an explanation as to why Los Angeles has such a great climate, “During the warm season…May to October…the [temperature]… seldom rises above 90̊ …This heat is tempered by cooling winds from the ocean between meridian and sunset, and by breezes from the mountain gaps during the night” (Truman 31). He explains that the warm season between May and October, which hardly ever rises above 90 degrees Fahrenheit, is cooled by the ocean in the day and the mountain gaps at night. The use of statistics in this book creates a wonderful image of the climate of Los Angeles and California overall, providing for the discussion of the healthful effects of the climate.

The book continues to talk about California weather and how it provides a healthy lifestyle. The author mentions various illnesses, but one that he chooses to hone in on is asthma. The book’s discussion on health makes it fitting for it to be found in the Bio Med section of the Special Collection Cage. California’s climate has been scientifically proven to provide health benefits for the sickly. For example, with asthma patients, certain allergens and irritants are responsible in triggering a flare-up. The best environment for asthmatics is a place that is free from these irritants. According to the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America, there is no place that will relieve asthma symptoms completely, but some climates can prove better health than others. The perfect climate for an asthma patient would be near the ocean, having low levels of air pollution and pollen, and free of irritants like cigarette smoke. People who live by the ocean side have lesser instances of asthma attacks. If someone suffers from wheezing, sitting on the ocean beach will bring relief. Based on statistics, the best places for asthmatics are: Orange County, San Jose, San Diego and Long Beach. These places usually have constant climatic condition without extremes of cold and heat; in addition, these places also have fairly low pollen counts. Therefore, it is true that the climate in California can help relieve the symptoms of asthma.

Though the book vividly describes the advantages and benefits of California climate with details, its highly praising tone suggests that it is not objective. Phrases like “[healthfulness] second to none in the world” (Truman 31), “delicate constitutions might be made strong forever” (Truman 32), “have yet to meet a person not charmed with Los Angeles—especially in winter” (Truman 41) sound like commercial language exaggerating the climate in California. Its quaint sales pitch may make a resident in Los Angeles today laugh out loud. In reality, unpleasant, even devastating weather conditions also take place on this promising land. For instance, in 1862 torrential winter rains caused uncontrollable floods and severe damage in Los Angeles  (Engstrom 141). The Santa Ana winds still bring hot, dry weather and induce wildfires each year nowadays.

Historical context of this book can explain the exaggeration. The advertising of southern California was first developed during the 1870s and 1880s, and became characteristic of this region (Dumke 28). Railroad companies, primarily Southern Pacific, wanted to sell their lands to newcomers and attract future customers of their trains, so they hired writers to promote California (Dumke 33-34). The author of this book, Truman, was one of them (Dumke 34); Carey McWilliams even called him “a professional railroad boomer” (116). Therefore, it is clear that the main point of this book is to advertise California and entice new migrants. In this way, local land developers could make their fortune.

This book has historical significance because it is representative of its time period. It demonstrates how land promotion was achieved in the 1870s through the discussion of the climate and healthfulness of California, giving people nowadays a hint of the social environment at that time. Since land promotion paved the way of the “Los Angeles’ boom,” reading this book is also an understanding of how Los Angeles has become what it is today. Though the information provided by this book is not fully reliable, the book itself is an honest account on the history of Los Angeles. This book’s synopsis on California’s climate and use of advertising provides Truman with a piece of literature of great merit found alongside the many artifacts located in Special Collections.


#### Works cited

{:.bibliography}
1. Dumke, Glenn S. The Boom of the Eighties in Southern California. San Marino, Calif: Huntington library, 1944. Print.
2. Engstrom, Wayne N.. &quot;The California Storm of January 1862.&quot; Quaternary Research: 141-148. Print.
3. McWilliams, Carey. Southern California: an Island on the Land. Santa Barbara [Calif.: Peregrine Smith, 1973. Print.
4. &quot;Semi-tropical California: Its Climate, Healthfulness, Productiveness, and Scenery ... by Major Ben. C. Truman.&quot; Semi-tropical California: Its Climate, Healthfulness, Productiveness, and Scenery ... by Major Ben. C. Truman. Library of Congress, n.d. Web. 01 June 2014. <a target="_blank" href="http://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/h?ammem/calbkbib:@field%28NUMBER+@od1%28calbk+203%29%29" type="url"> Library of Congress </a>
5. Szeftel, Alan. &quot;Asthma - The Effects of Climate and Altitude.&quot; Medicine Net. N.P., 5 Apr. 2002. Web. 01 June 2014.
6. Truman, Benjamin Cummings. Semi-tropical California: its climate, healthfulness, productiveness, and scenery. San Francisco: A.L. Bancroft and company, 1874. Print
