---
layout: post
title: "Politics and Society: The Watts Towers"
date: 2016-09-01
categories: ["politics and society"]
author: "Harnoor Kaur, Kimberly Bonifacio, J. Ubando, Arlinda Harris, Avyay Kuchibotla, Meera Madhavan"
lat: 33.938858
lng: -118.241912
collectiontitle: "California Ephemera Collection, 1860-, UCLA Library Special Collections"
quarter: Fall 2016
desc: "This is where the Watts Towers are to this day.The location is only a few blocks from the center of the Watts Riots of 1965,and at the time, the surrounding neighborhoods and buildings were destroyed and vandalized but the towers remained standing. It is now viewed as a monument of the community’s resilience and creativity."
---
This document, held in the Special Collections at the University of California, LosAngeles Library, is a set of four photo insets from an article in The Los Angeles Times. Thetop-left photo depicts Sabato ‘Simon’ Rodia, the designer and architect of the Watts Towers,sitting in front of one of the seventeen structures. Moving clockwise, the next picture shows two children standing side by side, hands intertwined as they gaze at a shell mosaic on the side of one of the seventeen towers. In the next image, a young boy in the foreground lifts a plank as three adults behind him do construction work near the site. The final photo in the inset looks upwards from the inside of one of the towers, a sight evoking a large steel-and-concrete net. Holistically,these pictures suggest Rodia’s intense dedication to his project, as well as the later significance of the Towers to the Watts community at large. A construction worker and Italian immigrant,Rodia (b. 1879, d. 1965) built the Watts Towers over the period from 1921 to 1955. Rodia passed away about a month before the week long 1965 Watts Riots, but his structures endure,symbolizing a notorious uprising against poverty, racial discrimination, and police brutality.

Rodia left his native Italy at fifteen, initially settling in Pennsylvania, where he worked as a laborer while seeking other opportunities. In 1921, two marriages and years of labor later, Rodia and his third wife, Carmen moved to California, where he found a job as a cement worker.The couple bought a large, triangular lot in the South Los Angeles neighborhood of Watts, eight miles south of down town. There, in his backyard,  Rodia began a project he dubbed ‘NuestroPueblo,’ Spanish for ‘Our Town.’ He built the Watts Towers with no guiding plans, drawings, or legal permits. His construction materials ultimately incorporated the standard steel rods and reinforced cement as well as miscellaneous items such as tile shards, broken dishes, seashells,and glass fragments. Rodia spent several weeknights and entire weekends on his project, a dedication that distanced him from his wife and son. His work on the Towers, however, did note strange him from people outside his family- the structures stood within view of the 35,000 to50,000 commuters who rode Long Beach/Los Angeles railroad daily. Rodia also encouraged his neighbors to visit the site, even hosting baptisms and weddings under the Towers. In the mid-1930s, his project caught the interest of journalists who then became visitors, and in 1952filmmaker William Hale made a documentary featuring Rodia and the Towers.

Today, the Watts Towers remain standing despite their age, uncoordinated construction,and non-standard material components. Rodia’s house burned during the 1965 riots, but theTowers withstood the damage and survived to become a monument to that chapter in local history. The Towers symbolize positivity and endurance in the wake of the Riots, whose legacy is otherwise one of prejudice and violence. Thus, the two, inexorably linked in the public imagination, represent a dichotomy of destruction and resilience, seen time and again in human history. Rodia’s piece inspired African-American artists in the Los Angeles area to take inspiration from the wreckage of the Watts rebellion. One artist, Noah Purifoy, recovered the rubble and repurposed it in artwork, initiating the assemblage art movement in the local scene(Von Blum 249). Purifoy and his colleagues believe that art education plays a significant role in the fight against ignorance and poverty, and that in that capacity, art can serve as a tool effecting social change. They collected remains of broken-down buildings and transformed the ‘garbage’ to art, as Rodia did in the past. Purifoy and his contemporaries found common objects more effective than traditional materials in conveying the African-American community’s historical struggle with oppression and disenfranchisement. The assemblage art, in its construction, also represented an ability to produce veritable masterpieces in the face of adversity, another triumph of creativity through tribulations.

The aging Watts Towers, known worldwide for their cultural and artistic significance,nevertheless receive alarmingly little funding for restoration and preservation. The site draws tourists from abroad but sees local visitors rather infrequently. This suggests a general Angeleno ambivalence to one of the most prominent examples of their city’s indigenous art, a lack of interest enabled and perpetuated by the challenges of visiting the Towers. Trips to the WattsTowers must be coordinated ahead of time, as they are open for tours only four days a week. The gates around the Towers further dampen appreciation for Rodia’s construction by obstructing its most intricate details. The Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA), currently in charge of preserving the Watts Towers, proposed servicing a regular shuttle bus to Watts from theLACMA museum in order to boost local tourism to the site. Despite this effort, the Watts TowersArt Center, which operates adjacent to the Towers, raised doubts regarding LACMA’sinvolvement. The Art Center’s suspicion that the Towers serve only as a tool to raise money for LACMA’s other projects has merit- the Towers have some broken ornaments and cement cracks that remain unfixed, and the three city workers LACMA assigned to maintain the Towers were dismissed under budget cuts. LACMA now looks to private and public donors to fund raise the restoration. Ideally, residents of Watts will see their landmark properly maintained, whether through LACMA’s participation or otherwise. The Watts Towers are, after all, ultimately a product of the neighborhood and a monument to its people’s endurance and creativity.


![Sabato Rodia, the designer and architect of the Watts Towers, sitting in front of one of the seventeen structures Two children stand, holding hands and looking at a shell mosaic on the side of one of the towers A young boy in the foreground lifts a plank as three people behind him do construction work near the site An upward-angled view from the inside of one of the towers that depicts steel and concrete radiating out from the center of the tower like the threads of a spider web](images/watts.jpg)
{:.image}

Watts Towers. Los Angeles Times, W-Sun, July 11, 1965. Image courtesy of UCLA Library Special Collections.
   {:.caption}


#### Works cited

{:.bibliography}
1. Cooper, Arnie. &quot;The Watts Towers, Sturdy Survivors.&quot; Wall Street Journal (Online) May 25 2011. ProQuest. Web. 12 Nov. 2016.
2. Nagourney, Adam. &quot;A Hidden Treasure Struggles in Los Angeles.&quot; The New York Times. The New York Times, 07 Feb. 2011. Web. 12 Nov. 2016.
3. Nagourney, Adam. &quot;A Hidden Treasure Struggles in Los Angeles.&quot; The New York Times. The New York Times, 07 Feb. 2011. Web. 12 Nov. 2016.
4. Silverman, Ronald H. “Watts, the Disadvantaged, and Art Education.” Art Education, vol. 19, no. 3, 1966, pp. 17–20. JSTOR. Web. 12 Nov. 2016.
5. Von Blum, Paul. &quot;Recovering The Rubble: African American Assemblage Art In Los Angeles.&quot; Journal Of Pan African Studies 4.5 (2011): 248-261. Academic Search Complete. Web. 12 Nov. 2016.
6. California Ephemera Collection, 1860-, Collection #200, Box 108
